CHAPTER 12: HALCYON

The probationary appointment was logged later that same day. The Captain called him in, swore him in, then congratulated him and called him "Mister" Jones. The ceremony was simple, with no spectator but Hendrix and the Captain's secretary. The commonplaces attendant on the change were, for a while, more startling to Max than the promotion itself. They started at once. "You had better take the rest of the day to shake down, Mr. Jones," the Captain said, blinking vaguely. "Okay, Doc?" "Certainly, sir." "Good. Bennett, will you ask Dumont to step in?" The Chief Passengers' Steward was unblinkingly unsurprised to find the recent steward's mate third a ship's officer. To the Captain's query he said, "I was planning to put Mr. Jones in stateroom B-014, sir. Is that satisfactory?" "No doubt, no doubt." "I'll have boys take care of his luggage at once." "Good. You trot along with Dumont, Mr. Jones. No, wait a moment. We must find you a cap." The Captain went to his wardrobe, fumbled around. "I had one that would do here somewhere." Hendrix had been standing with his hands behind him. "I fetched one, Captain. Mr. Jones and I wear the same size, I believe." "Good. Though perhaps his head has swelled a bit in the past few minutes. Eh?" Hendrix grinned savagely. "If it has, I'll shrink it." He handed the cap to Max. The wide gold strap and sunburst the Astrogator had removed; substituted was a narrow strap with tiny sunburst surrounded by the qualifying circle of the apprentice. Max thought it must be old insignia saved for sentimental reasons by Hendrix himself. He choked up as he mumbled his thanks, then followed Dumont out of the Captain's cabin, stumbling over his feet. When they reached the companionway Dumont stopped. "There is no need to go down to the bunkroom, sir. If you will tell me the combination of your locker, we'll take care of everything." "Oh, gee, Mr. Dumont! I've got just a small amount of truck. I can carry it up myself." Dumont's face had the impassivity of a butler's. "If I may make a suggestion, sir, you might like to see your stateroom while I have the matter taken care of." It was not a question; Max interpreted it correctly to mean: "_Look, dummy, I know the score and you don't. Do what I tell you before you make a terrible break!_" Max let himself be guided. It is not easy to make the jump from crewman to officer while remaining in the same ship. Dumont knew this, Max did not. Whether his interest was fatherly, or simply a liking for correct protocol--or both--Dumont did not intend to allow the brand-new junior officer to go lower than "C" deck until he had learned to carry his new dignity with grace. So Max sought out stateroom B-014. The bunk had a real foam mattress and a spread. There was a tiny wash basin with running water and a mirror. There was a bookshelf over the bunk and a wardrobe for his uniforms. There was even a shelf desk that let down for his convenience. There was a telephone on the wall, a buzzer whereby he could summon the steward's mate on watch! There was a movable chair all his own, a wastebasket, and--yes!-- a little rug on the deck. And best of all, there was a door with a lock. The fact that the entire room was about as large as a piano box bothered him not at all. He was opening drawers and poking into things when Dumont returned. Dumont was not carrying Max's meager possessions himself; that task was delegated to one of his upper-decks staff. The steward's mate followed Dumont in and said, "Where shall I put this, sir?" Max realized with sudden embarrassment that the man waiting on him had eaten opposite him for past months. "Oh! Hello, Jim. Just dump it on the bunk. Thanks a lot." "Yes, sir. And congratulations!" "Uh, thanks!" They shook hands. Dumont let that proper ceremony persist for a minimum time, then said, "That's all now, Gregory. You can go back to the pantry." He turned to Max. "Anything else, sir?" "Oh, no, everything is fine." "May I suggest that you probably won't want to sew insignia on these uniforms yourself? Unless you are better with a needle than I am," Dumont added with just the right chuckle. "Well, I guess I could." "Mrs. Dumont is handy with a needle, taking care of the lady passengers as she does. Suppose I take this one? It can be ready and pressed in time for dinner." Max was happy to let him. He was suddenly appalled by a terrifying notion--he was going to have to eat in the Bifrost Lounge! But there were further disturbances before dinner. He was completing the small task of stowing his possessions when there came a knock on the door, followed immediately by someone coming in. Max found himself nose to nose with Mr. Simes. Simes looked at the cap on his head and laughed. "Take that thing off before you wear out your ears." Max did not do so. He said, "You wanted me, sir?" "Yes. Just long enough, Smart Boy, to give you a word of advice." "Yes?" Simes tapped himself on the chest. "Just this. There is only one assistant astrogator in this ship--and I'm it. Remember that. I'll still be it long after you've been busted back to sweeping up after cows. Which is where you belong." Max felt a flush crawl up his neck and burn his cheeks. "Why," he asked, "if you think that, didn't you veto my appointment?" Simes laughed again. "Do I look like a fool? The Captain says yes, the Astrogator says yes--should I stick my neck out? It's easier to wait and let you stick your neck out--which you will. I just wanted to let you know that a dinky piece of gold braid doesn't mean a thing. You're still junior to me by plenty. Don't forget it." Max clenched his jaw and did not answer. Simes went on, "Well?" "'Well' what?" "I just gave you an order." "Oh. Aye aye, Mr. Simes. I won't forget it. I certainly won't." Simes looked at him sharply, said, "See that you don't," and left. Max was still facing his door, clenching his fists, when Gregory tapped on the door. "Dinner, sir. Five minutes."

Max delayed as long as he could, wishing mightily that he could slide down to Easy deck and take his usual place in the warm, noisy, relaxed comfort of the crew's mess. He hesitated in the lounge doorway, paralyzed with stage fright. The beautiful room was blazing with light and looked unfamiliar; he had never been in it save in early morning, to change the sandbox located down the pantry passage--at which times only standing lights were burning. He was barely in time; some of the ladies were seated but the Captain was still standing. Max realized that he should be near his chair, ready to sit down when the Captain did--or as soon as the ladies were seated, he amended--but where should he go? He was still jittering when he heard his name shouted. "Max!" Ellie came running up and threw her arms around his neck. "Max! I just heard. I think it's _wonderful!_" She looked at him, her eyes shining, then kissed him on both cheeks. Max blushed to his ears. He felt as if every eye was turned on him--and he was right. To add to his embarrassment Ellie was dressed in formal evening dress of Hesperan high style, which not only made her look older and much more female, but also shocked his puritanical hillbilly standards. She let go of him, which was well but left him in danger of collapsing at the knees. She started to babble something, Max did not know what, when Chief Steward Dumont appeared at her elbow. "The Captain is waiting, Miss," he said firmly. "Bother to the Captain! Oh, well--see you after dinner, Max." She headed for the Captain's table. Dumont touched Max's sleeve and munnured, "This way, sir." His place was at the foot of the Chief Engineer's table. Max knew Mr. Compagnon by sight but had never spoken to him. The Chief glanced up and said, "Evening, Mr. Jones. Glad to have you with us. Ladies and gentlemen, our new astrogation officer, Mr. Jones. On your right, Mr. Jones, is Mrs. Daigler. Mr. Daigler on her right, then--" and so on, around the table: Dr. and Mrs. Weberbauer and their daughter Rebecca, Mr. and Mrs. Scott, a Mr. Arthur, Senhor and Senhora Vargas. Mrs. Daigler thought it was _lovely_, his being promoted. And so _nice_ to have more young people at the table. She was much older than Max but young enough to be handsome and aware of it. She wore more jewels than Max had ever seen and her hair was lacquered into a structure a foot high and studded with pearls. She was as perfectly finished and as expensive as a precision machine and she made Max uncomfortable. But he was not yet as uncomfortable as he could be. Mrs. Daigler produced a wisp of a handkerchief from her bosom, moistened it and said, "Hold still, Mr. Jones." She scrubbed his cheek. "Turn your head." Blushing, Max complied. "There, that's better," Mrs. Daigler announced. "Mama fixed." She turned away and said, "Don't you think, Mr. Compagnon, that science, with all the wonderful things they do these days, could discover a lip paint that wouldn't come off?" "Stop it, Maggie," her husband interrupted. "Pay no attention, Mr. Jones. She's got a streak of sadism as wide as she is." "George, you'll pay for that. Well, Chief?" The Chief Engineer patted his lips with snowy linen. "I think it must already have been invented, but there was no market. Women like to brand men, even temporarily." "Oh, bosh!" "It's a woman's world, ma'am." She turned to Max. "Eldreth is a dear, isn't she? I suppose you knew her 'dirtside'?--as Mr. Compagnon calls it." "No, ma'am." "Then how? I mean, after all, there isn't much opportunity. Or is there?" "Maggie, stop pestering him. Let the man eat his dinner." Mrs. Weberbauer on his other side was as easy and motherly as Mrs. Daigler was difficult. Under her soothing presence Max managed to start eating. Then he noticed that the way he grasped a fork was not the way the others did, tried to change, made a mess of it, became aware of his untidy nails, and wanted to crawl under the table. He ate about three hundred calories, mostly bread and butter. At the end of the meal Mrs. Daigler again gave her attention to him, though she addressed the Chief Engineer. "Mr. Compagnon, isn't it customary to toast a promotion?" "Yes," the Chief conceded. "But he must pay for it. That's a requirement." Max found himself signing a chit presented by Dumont. The price made him blink--his first trip might be a professional success, but so far it had been financial disaster. Champagne, iced in a shiny bucket, accompanied the chit and Dumont cut the wires and drew the cork with a flourish. The Chief Engineer stood up. "Ladies and gentlemen--I give you Astrogator Jones. May he never misplace a decimal point!" "Cheers !"--"Bravo!"--"Speech, speech!" Max stumbled to his feet and muttered, "Thank you."

His first watch was at eight o'clock the next morning. He ate breakfast alone and reflected happily that as a watch stander he would usually eat either before or after the passengers. He was in the control room a good twenty minutes early. Kelly glanced up and said, "Good morning, sir." Max gulped. "Er--good morning, Chief!" He caught Smythe grinning behind the computer, turned his eyes hastily away. "Fresh coffee, Mr. Jones. Will you have a cup?" Max let Kelly pour for him; while they drank Kelly quietly went over the details--acceleration schedule, position and vector, power units in use, sights taken, no special orders, etc. Noguchi relieved Smythe, and shortly before the hour Dr. Hendrix appeared. "Good morning, sir." "Good morning, Doctor." "Morning." Hendrix accepted coffee, turned to Max. "Have you relieved the officer of the watch?" "Uh, why no, sir." "Then do so. It lacks less than a minute of eight." Max turned to Kelly and shakily saluted. "I relieve you, sir." "Very well, sir." Kelly went below at once. Dr. Hendrix sat down, took out a book and started to read. Max realized with a chilly feeling that he had been pushed in, to swim or not. He took a deep breath and went over to Noguchi. "Noggy, let's get the plates ready for the middle o' watch sights." Noguchi glanced at the chronometer. "As you say, sir." "Well . . . I guess it is early. Let's take a few dopplers." "Aye aye, sir." Noguchi climbed out of the saddle where he had been loafing. Max said in a low voice, "Look, Noggy, you don't have to say 'sir' to me." Noguchi answered just as quietly. "Kelly wouldn't like it if I didn't. Better let it ride." "Oh." Max frowned. "Noggy? How does the rest of the Worry gang feel about it?" Noguchi did not pretend not to understand. He answered, "Shucks, they're all rooting for you, if you can swing it." "You're sure?" "Certain. Just as long as you don't try to make a big hairy thing out of yourself like--well, like some I could mention." The computerman added, "Maybe Kovak isn't exactly cheering. He's been having a watch of his own, you know--for the first time." "He's sore?" "Not exactly. He couldn't expect to keep it long anyhow, not with a transition coming up. He won't go out of his way to give you trouble, he'll be fair." Max made a mental note to see what he could do to swing Kovak over to his side. The two manned the dopplerscope, took readings on stars forward of vector, checked what they found by spectrostellograph, and compared both with standard plates from the chart safe. At first Max had to remember that he was in charge; then he got so interested in fussy details of measurements that he was no longer self-conscious. At last Noguchi touched his sleeve. "Pushing ten o'clock, sir. I'd better get set up." "Huh? Sure, go ahead." He reminded himself not to help Noggy; the chartsman has his prerogatives, too. But he checked the set up just as Hendrix always did, as Simes rarely did, and as Kelly sometimes did, depending on who had made it. After they had gotten the new data Max programmed the problem on paper (there being plenty of time), then called it off to Noguchi at the computer. He thumbed the book himself, there being no "numbers boy" available. The figures were as clear in his recollection as ever, but he obeyed Hendrix's injunction not to depend on memory. The result worried him. They were not "in the groove." Not that the _Asgard_ was far out, but the discrepancy was measurable. He checked what he had done, then had Noguchi run the problem again, using a different programming method. The result came out the same. Sighing, he computed the correction and started to take it to Hendrix for approval. But the Astrogator still paid no attention; he sat at the console, reading a novel from the ship's library. Max made up his mind. He went to the console and said, "Excuse me, sir. I need to get there for a moment." Hendrix got up without answering and found another seat. Max sat down and called the power room. "Control officer speaking. I intend to increase boost at eleven o'clock. Stand by for time check." Hendrix must have heard him, he thought, but the Astrogator gave no sign. Max fed in the correction, set the control chronometer to execute his wishes at eleven plus-or-minus nothing. Shortly before noon Simes showed up. Max had already written his own log, based on Noguchi's log, and had signed it "M. Jones." He had hesitated, then added "C. O. o/W." Simes went to Dr. Hendrix, saluted, and said, "Ready to relieve you, sir." Hendrix spoke his first word since eight o'clock. "He's got it." Simes looked non-plussed, then went to Max. "Ready to relieve you." Max recited off the situation data while Simes read the log and the order book. Simes interrupted him while he was still listing minor ship's data. "Okay, I relieve you. Get out of my control room, Mister." Max got out. Dr. Hendrix had already gone down. Noguchi had loitered at the foot of the ladder. He caught Max's eye, made a circle with thumb and finger and nodded. Max grinned at him, started to ask a question; he wanted to know if that discrepancy was a booby trap, intentionally left in by Kelly. Then he decided that it would not be fitting; he'd ask Kelly himself, or figure it from the records. "Thanks, Noggy." That watch turned out to be typical only in the one respect that Dr. Hendrix continued to require Max to be officer of the watch himself. He did not again keep quiet but rode Max steadily, drilling him hour after hour, requiring him to take sights and set up problems continuously, as if the _Asgard_ were actually close to transition. He did not permit Max to program on paper but forced him to pretend that time was too short and that data must immediately go into the computer, be acted on at once. Max sweated, with remote controls in each fist and with Hendrix himself acting as "numbers boy." The Astrogator kept pushing him for speed, speed, and more speed--never at the sacrifice of accuracy, for any error was unforgivable. But the goal was always greater speed. Once Max objected. "Sir, if you would let me put it right into the machine, I could cut it down a lot." Hendrix snapped, "When you have your own control room, you can do that, if you think it wise. Now you'll do it _my_ way." Occasionally Kelly would take over as his supervisor. The Chief Computerman was formal, using such phrases as, "May I suggest, sir--" or "I think I'd do it this way, sir." But once he broke out with, "Confound it, Max! Don't ever pull a dumb stunt like that!" Then he started to amend his remarks. Max grinned. "Please, Chief. For a moment you made me feel at home. Thanks." Kelly looked sheepish. "I'm tired, I guess. I could do with a smoke and some java." While they were resting Max noted that Lundy was out of earshot and said, "Chief? You know more than I'll ever learn. Why didn't _you_ buck for astrogator? Didn't you ever get a chance?" Kelly suddenly looked bleak. "I once did," he said stiffly. "Now I know my limitations." Max shut up, much embarrassed. Thereafter Kelly reverted to calling him Max whenever they were alone.

Max did not see Sam for more than a week after he moved up to Baker deck. Even then the encounter was chance; he ran across him outside the Purser's office. "Sam!" "Good morning, sir!" Sam drew up in a smart salute with a broad grin on his face. "Huh? 'Good morning, sir' my foot! How's it going, Sam?" "Aren't you going to return my salute? In my official capacity I can report you, you know. The Captain is very, very fussy about ship's etiquette." Max made a rude noise. "You can hold that salute until you freeze, you clown." Sam relaxed. "Kid, I've been meaning to get up and congratulate you--but every time I find you're on watch. You must live in the Worry Hole." "Pretty near. Look, I'll be off this evening until midnight. What do you say I stop down to see you?" Sam shook his head. "I'll be busy." "Busy how? You expecting a jail break? Or a riot, maybe?" Sam answered soberly, "Kid, don't get me wrong-- but you stick to your end of the ship and I'll stick to mine. No, no, keep quiet and listen. I'm as proud as if I had invented you. But you can't fraternize in crew's quarters, not even with the Chief Master-at-Arms. Not yet." "Who'll know? Who's to care?" "You know blamed well that Giordano would love to tell Kuiper that you didn't know how to behave like an officer--and Old Lady Kuiper would pass it along to the Purser. Take my advice. Have I ever thrown you a curve?" Max dropped the matter, though he badly wanted a chin with Sam. He needed to tell him that his faked record had been breached and to consult with him as to probable consequences. Of course, he considered as he returned to his stateroom, there wasn't a thing to keep him from carrying out his orginal intention of jumping ship with Sam at Nova Terra--except that it was now no longer possible to imagine it. He was an officer.

They were approaching the middle transition; the control room went on watch-and-watch. But still Dr. Hendrix did not take the watch; Simes and Jones alternated. The Astrogator stood every watch with Max but required him to do the work and carry the responsibility himself. Max sweated it out and learned that practice problems and study of theory were nothing like having it matter when he had no way and no time to check. You had to be _right_, every time-- and there was always doubt. When, during the last twenty-four hours, the Worry gang went on continuous watch, Max thought that Dr. Hendrix would push him aside. But he did not. Simes was pushed aside, yes, but Max took the worry seat, with Hendrix bending over him and watching everything he did, but not interfering. "Great heavens!" Max thought. "Surely he isn't going to let me make this transition? I'm not ready for it, not yet. I'll never keep up." But data was coming too fast for further worry; he had to keep processing it, see the answers, and make decisions. It was not until twenty minutes before transition that Hendrix pushed him aside without a word and took over. Max was still recovering when they burst through into a new sky.

The last approach-and-transition before Halcyon was much like the second. There were a couple of weeks of easy watches, headed by Simes, Jones, and Kovak, with both Kelly and Hendrix getting a little rest. Max liked it, both on and off watch. On watch he continued to practice, trying to achieve the inhuman speed of Dr. Hendrix. Off watch he slept and enjoyed himself. The Bifrost Lounge no longer terrified him. He now played three-dee with Ellie there, with Chipsie on his shoulder, giving advice. Ellie had long since waved her eyes at Captain Blaine and convinced him that a pet so well behaved, so well house-broken, and in particular so well mannered (she had trained the spider puppy to say, "Good morning, Captain," whenever it saw Blaine)--in all respects so civilized should not be forced to live in a cage. Max had even learned to swap feeble repartee with Mrs. Daigler, thinking up remarks and waiting for a chance. Ellie was threatening to teach him to dance, although he managed to stall her until resumption of watch-and-watch before transition made it impossible. Again he found himself shoved into the worry seat for the last part of the approach. This time Dr. Hendrix did not displace him until less than ten minutes before burst through.

On the easy drop down to Halcyon Ellie's determination won out. Max learned to dance. He found that he liked it. He had good rhythm, did not forget her instructions, and Ellie was a fragrant, pleasant armful. "I've done all I can," she announced at last. "You're the best dancer with two left feet I've ever met." She required him to dance with Rebecca Weberbauer and with Mrs. Daigler. Mrs. Daigler wasn't so bad after all, as long as she kept her mouth shut--and Rebecca was cute. He began to look forward to the fleshpots of Halcyon, that being Ellie's stated reason for instructing him; he was to be conscripted as her escort. Only one thing marred the final leg; Sam was in trouble. Max did not find out about it until after the trouble broke. He got up early to go on watch and found Sam cleaning decks in the silent passages of passenger quarters. He was in dungarees and wearing no shield. "Sam!" Sam looked up. "Oh. Hi, kid. Keep your voice down, you'll wake people." "But Sam, what in Ned are you doing?" "Me? I seem to be manicuring this deck." "But why?" Sam leaned on his broom. "Well, kid, it's like this. The Captain and I had a difference of opinion. He won." "You've been busted?" "Your intuition is dazzling." "What happened?" "Max, the less you know about it the better. Don't fret. _Sic transit gloria mundi_--Tuesday is usually worse." "But-- See here, I've got to grab chow and go on watch. I'll look you up later." "Don't." Max got the story from Noguchi. Sam, it appeared, had set up a casino in an empty storeroom. He might have gotten away with it indefinitely had it remained a cards-and-dice set up, with a rake off for the house-- the "house" being the Chief Master-at-Arms. But Sam had added a roulette wheel and that had been his downfall; Giordano had come to suspect that the wheel had less of the element of chance than was customary in better-run gambling halls--and had voiced his suspicion to Chief Clerk Kuiper. From there events took an inevitable course. "When did he put in this wheel?" "Right after we raised from Garson's Planet." Max thought uncomfortably of the "tea cozies" he had helped Sam bring aboard there. Noguchi went on, "Uh, didn't you know, sir? I thought you and him were pretty close before--you know, before you moved up decks." Max avoided an answer and dug into the log. He found it under the previous day, added by Bennett to Simes' log. Sam was restricted to the ship for the rest of the trip, final disciplinary action postponed until return to Terra. That last seemed to mean that Captain Blaine intended to give Sam a chance to show good behavior before making his recommendation to the guilds--the Captain was a sweet old guy, he certainly was. But "restricted"? Then Sam would never get his chance to run away from whatever it was he was running away from. He located Sam as soon as he was off watch, digging him out of his bunkroom and taking him out into the corridor. Sam looked at him sourly. "I thought I told you not to look me up?" "Never mind! Sam, I'm worried about you. This 'restricted' angle . . . it means you won't have a chance to--" "_Shut up!_" It was a whisper but Max shut up. "Now look here," Sam went on, "Forget it. I got my stake and that's the important point." "But . . ." "Do you think they can seal this ship tight enough to keep me in when I decide to leave? Now stay away from me. You're teacher's pet and I want to keep it that way. I don't want you lectured about bad companions, meaning me." "But I want to help, Sam. I . . ." "Will you kindly get up above 'C' deck where you belong?" He did not see Sam again that leg; presently he stopped worrying about it. Hendrix required him to compute the planetary approach--child's play compared with a transition--then placed Max at the conn when they grounded. This was a titulary responsibility since it was precomputed and done on radar-automatic. Max sat with the controls under his hands, ready to override the autopilot--and Hendrix stood behind him, ready to override him--but there was no need; the _Asgard_ came down by the plotted curve as easy as descending stairs. The thrust beams bit in and Max reported, "Grounded, sir, on schedule." "Secure." Max spoke into the ship's announcers. "Secure power room. Secure all space details. Dirtside routine, second section." Of the four days they were there he spent the first three nominally supervising, and actually learning from, Kovak in the routine ninety-day inspection and overhaul of control room instruments. Ellie was vexed with him, as she had had different plans. But on the last day he hit dirt with her, chaperoned by Mr. and Mrs. Mendoza. It was a wonderful holiday. Compared with Terra, Halcyon is a bleak place and Bonaparte is not much of a city. Nevertheless Halcyon is an earth-type planet with breathable air, and the party from the _Asgard_ had not set foot outdoors since Earthport, months of time and unthinkable light-years behind. The season was postaphelion, midsummer, Nu Pegasi burned warm and bright in blue sky. Mr. Mendoza hired a carriage and they drove out into green, rolling countryside behind four snuffling little Halcyon ponies. There they visited a native pueblo, a great beehive structure of mud, conoid on conoid, and bought souvenirs--two of which turned out to have "Made in Japan" stamped inconspicuously on them. Their driver, Herr Eisenberg, interpreted for them. The native who sold the souvenirs kept swiveling his eyes, one after another, at Mrs. Mendoza. He twittered some remarks to the driver, who guffawed. "What does he say?" she asked. "He was complimenting you." "So? But how?" "Well . . . he says you are for a slow fire and no need for seasoning; you'd cook up nicely. And he'd do it, too," the colonist added, "if you stayed here after dark." Mrs. Mendoza gave a little scream. "You didn't tell us they were _cannibals_. Josie, take me back!" Herr Eisenberg looked horrified. "Cannibals? Oh, no, lady! They don't eat each other, they just eat us-- when they can get us, that is. But there hasn't been an incident in twenty years." "But that's worse!" "No, it isn't, lady. Look at it from their viewpoint. They're civilized. This old fellow would never break one of their laws. But to them we are just so much prime beef, unfortunately hard to catch." "Take us back at once! Why, there are hundreds of them, and only five of us." "Thousands, lady. But you are safe as long as Gneeri is shining." He gestured at Nu Pegasi. "It's bad juju to kill meat during daylight. The spirit stays around to haunt." Despite his reassurances the party started back. Max noticed that Eldreth had been unfrightened. He himself had wondered what had kept the natives from tying them up until dark. They dined at the Josephine, Bonaparte's best (and only) hotel. But there was a real three-piece orchestra, a dance floor, and food that was at least a welcome change from the menus of the Bifrost Lounge. Many ship's passengers and several officers were there; it made a jolly party. Ellie made Max dance between each course. He even got up his nerve to ask Mrs. Daigler for a dance, once she came over and suggested it. During the intermission Eldreth steered him out on the adjacent balcony. There she looked up at him. "You leave that Daigler hussy alone, hear me?" "Huh? I didn't do anything." She suddenly smiled warmly. "Of course not, you big sweet ninny. But Ellie has to take care of you." She turned and leaned on the rail. Halcyon's early night had fallen, her three moons were chasing each other. The sky blazed with more stars than can be seen in Terra's lonely neighborhood. Max pointed out the strange constellations and showed her the departure direction they would take tomorrow to reach transition for Nova Terra. He had learned four new skies so far, knew them as well as he knew the one that hung over the Ozarks--and he would learn many more. He was already studying, from the charts, other skies they would be in this trip. "Oh, Max, isn't it _lovely!_" "Sure is. Say, there's a meteor. They're scarce here, mighty scarce." "Make a wish! Make a wish quick!" "Okay." He wished that he would get off easy when it came to the showdown. Then he decided that wasn't right; he ought to wish old Sam out of his jam--not that he believed in it, either way. She turned and faced him. "What did you wish?" "Huh?" He was suddenly self-conscious. "Oh, mustn't tell, that spoils it." "All right. But I'll bet you get your wish," she added softly. He thought for a moment that he could have kissed her, right then, if he had played his cards right. But the moment passed and they went inside. The feeling stayed with him on the ride back, made him elated. It was a good old world, even if there were some tough spots. Here he was, practically a junior astrogator on his first trip--and it hadn't been more than weeks since he was borrowing McAllister's mules to work the crop and going barefooted a lot to save shoes. And yet here he was in uniform, riding beside the best-dressed girl in four planets. He fingered the insignia on his chest. Marrying Ellie wasn't such an impossible idea now that he was an officer--if he ever decided to marry. Maybe her old man wouldn't consider an officer--and an astrogator at that--completely ineligible. Ellie wasn't bad; she had spunk and she played a fair game of three-dee-- most girls wouldn't even be able to learn the rules. He was still in a warm glow when they reached the ship and were hoisted in. Kelly met him at the lock. "Mr. Jones--the Captain wants to see you." "Huh? Oh. G'night, Ellie--I'll have to run." He hurried after Kelly. "What's up?" "Dr. Hendrix is dead."