CHAPTER 13: TRANSITION

Max questioned Kelly as they hurried up to the Captain's cabin. "I don't know. I just don't know, Max." Kelly seemed close to tears. "I saw him before dinner--he came into the Hole to check what you and Kovak have been doing. He seemed all right. But the Purser found him dead in his bunk, the middle of the evening." He added worriedly, "I don't know what is going to happen now." "What do you mean?" "Well . . . if I was captain, I'd lay over and send for a relief. But I don't know." For the first time Max realized that this change would make Mr. Simes the astrogator. "How long would it take to get a relief?" "Figure it out. The _Dragon_ is about three months behind us; she'd pick up our mail. A year about." In the contradictions of interstellar travel the ships themselves were the fastest method of communication; a radio message (had such a silly thing been attempted) would have taken more than two centuries to reach Earth, a like time for a reply. Max found the Captain's cabin open and crowded with officers, all standing around, saying nothing, and looking solemn; he slipped inside without announcing himself and tried to be inconspicuous. Kelly did not go in. Captain Blaine sat at his desk with head bent. Several stragglers, members of the gay party at the Josephine, arrived after Max; First Officer Walther checked them off with his eyes, then said quietly to Blaine, "Ship's officers all present, sir." Captain Blaine raised his head and Max was shocked to see how old he looked. "Gentlemen," he said in a low voice, "you know the sad news. Dr. Hendrix was found dead in his room this evening. Heart attack. The Surgeon tells me that he passed on about two hours before he was found--and that his death was probably almost painless." His voice broke, then he continued. "Brother Hendrix will be placed in his last orbit two hours after we raise ship tomorrow. That is how he would have wished it, the Galaxy was his home. He gave unstintingly of himself that men should ride safely among the stars." He paused so long that Max thought that the old man had forgotten that others were present. But when he resumed his voice was almost brisk. "That is all, gentlemen. Astrogators will please remain." Max was not sure that he counted as an astrogator but the use of the plural decided him. First Officer Walther started to leave; Blaine called him back. When the four were alone, the Captain said, "Mr. Simes, you will take over head-of-department duties at once. Mr., uh . . ."; his eyes rested on Max. "Jones, sir." "Mr. Jones will assume your routine duties, of course. This tragedy leaves you short-handed; for the rest of this trip I will stand a regular watch." Simes spoke up. "That isn't necessary, Captain. We'll make out." "Perhaps. But those are my wishes." "Aye aye, sir." "Prepare to lift on schedule. Any questions?" "No, sir." "Goodnight, gentlemen. Dutch, stay a moment, please?" Outside the door Simes started to turn away; Max stopped him. "Mr. Simes?" "Huh? Yes?" "Any instructions for me, sir?" Simes looked him over. "You stand your watch, Mister. I'll handle everything else." The next morning Max found a crepe armband on his desk and a notice from the First Officer that mourning would continue for one week. The _Asgard_ raised on schedule, with the Captain sitting quietly in his chair, with Simes at the control console. Max stood near the Captain, with nothing to do. Aside from the absence of Hendrix all was routine--except that Kelly was quite bad-tempered. Simes, Max admitted, handled the maneuver smartly--but it was precomputed, anyone could have done it; shucks, Ellie could have been sitting there. Or Chipsie. Max had the first watch. Simes left him after enjoining him not to deviate from schedule without phoning him first. An hour later Kovak relieved Max temporarily and Max hurried to the passenger lock. There were five honorary pall bearers, the Captain, Mr. Walther, Simes, Max, and Kelly. Behind them, crowding the passageways, were officers and most of the crew. Max saw no passengers. The inner door of the lock was opened; two steward's mates carried the body in and placed it against the outer door. Max was relieved to see that it had been wrapped in a shroud covering it completely. They closed the inner door and withdrew. The Captain stood facing the door, with Simes and the First Officer standing guard on one side of the door and, on the other side facing them, Max and Kelly. The Captain flung one word over his shoulder: "Pressure!" Behind stood Bennett wearing a portable phone; he relayed the word to the power room. The pressure gauge over the lock door showed one atmosphere; now it started to crawl upward. The Captain took a little book from his pocket and began to read the service for the dead. Feeling that he could not stand to listen Max watched the pressure gauge. Steadily it climbed. Max reflected that the ship had already passed escape speed for the Nu Pegasi system before he had been relieved; the body would take an open orbit. The gauge reached ten atmospheres; Captain Blaine closed his book. "Warn the passengers," he said to Bennett. Shortly the loudspeakers sounded: "All hands! All passengers! The ship will be in free fall for thirty seconds. Anchor yourselves and do not change position." Max reached behind him, found one of the many hand holds always present around an airlock and pulled down so that his grip would keep his feet in contact with the deck. A warning siren howled--then suddenly he was weightless as the ship's boost and the artificial anomalous gravity field were both cut out. He heard the Captain say loudly and firmly, "'Ashes to ashes, dust to dust.' Let the body be cast forth." The pressure gauge dropped suddenly to zero and Dr. Hendrix was launched into space, there to roam the stars for all eternity. Max felt weight again as the power room brought them back to ship-normal. The pressure gauge showed gradually building pressure. People turned away and left, their voices murmuring low. Max went up and relieved the watch.

The following morning Simes moved into Dr. Hendrix's cabin. There was trouble with First Officer Walther about it--Max heard only third-hand reports-- but the Captain upheld Simes; he stayed in the Astrogator's quarters. The Worry Hole settled into routine not much different from what had gone before, except that Simes' personality spread through everything. There had never been a posted watch list before; Kelly had always assigned the crewmen and the Doctor had simply informed the top-watch standers orally of his wishes. Now a typed list appeared:

FIRST WATCH Randolph Simes, Astrogator SECOND WATCH Captain Blaine (M. Jones, acting apprentice, under instruction) THIRD WATCH Kelly, Ch. Cmptrmn. (_signed_) Randolph Simes, Astrogator

Below was a four-watch list for crewmen, also signed by Simes. Max looked at it and shrugged it off. It was obvious that Simes had it in for him, though he could not figure out why. It was equally obvious that Simes did not intend to let him do any astrogation and that Max's chances of being accepted in time as a fullfledged brother had now, with the death of Dr. Hendrix, sunk to zero. Unless, of course, Captain Blaine overrode Simes and forced a favorable report, which was extremely unlikely. Max again began to think of going along with Sam at Nova Terra. Well, in the meantime he'd stand his watches and try to stay out of trouble. That was that. There was only one transition to be made between Halcyon and Nova Terra, a leap of ninety-seven light-years three weeks out from Halcyon at a boost of seventeen gravities--the boost always depended on the distance from the star to the gateway, since the purpose was to arrive there just under the speed of light. The Worry Hole stayed on a watch in three for the officers and one in four for crewmen for the first two weeks. Captain Blaine showed up each watch but seemed quite willing for Max to carry out the light duties of that portion of the leg. He gave little instruction--when he did, he was likely to wander off into anecdotes, amusing but not useful. Max tried to continue his own drill, carrying out the routine middle o' watch computation as if it were the frantic matter it would have been near transition. Captain Blaine watched him, then said mildly, "Don't get yourself into a state, son. Always program on paper when possible--always. And take time to check. Hurrying causes mistakes." Max said nothing, thinking of Dr. Hendrix, but carried out the orders. At the end of his first watch under the Captain Max signed the log as usual. When Simes came on watch four hours later, Max was dug out of bed and required to report to the control room. Simes pointed to the log. "What's the idea, Mister?" "Of what, sir?" "Signing the log. You weren't officer of the watch." "Well, sir, the Captain seemed to expect it. I've signed a lot of logs and he's always approved them in the past." "Hmm-- I'll speak to the Captain. Go below." At the end of his next watch, having received no instructions, Max prepared the log and took it to the Captain. "Sir? Do you want to sign this? Or shall I?" "Eh?" Blaine looked at it. "Oh, I suppose I had better. Always let a head of department do things his own way if possible. Remember that when you are a skipper, son." He signed it. That settled it until the Captain started a habit of not being there, first for short periods, then for longer. The time came when he was absent at the end of the watch; Max phoned Mr. Simes. "Sir, the Captain isn't here. What do you want me to do?" "So what? It's his privilege to leave the control room." "But Kelly is ready to relieve and the log isn't signed. Shall I sign it? Or shall I phone him?" "Phone him? Jumping jeepers, no! Are you crazy?" "What are your orders, sir?" Simes was silent, then answered, "Print his name, then sign under it 'By direction'--and after this use your head." They changed to watch-and-watch for the last week. Max continued under the Captain; Kelly assisted Simes. Once the shift was made Blaine became meticulous about being present in the control room and, when Max started to make the first computation, gently pushed him aside. "I had better take over, lad. We're getting closer now." So Max assisted him--and became horrifyingly aware that the Captain was not the man he must once have been. His knowledge of theory was sound and he knew all the short cuts--but his mind tended to wander. Twice in one computation Max had to remind him diplomatically of details. Yet the Old Man seemed unaware of it, was quite cheerful. It went on that way. Max began to pray that the Captain would let the new Astrogator make the transition himself--much as he despised Simes. He wanted to discuss his misgivings with Kelly--there was no one else with whom it would have been possible--but Kelly was on the opposite watch with Simes. There was nothing to do but worry. When the last day arrived he discovered that Captain Blaine neither intended to take the ship through himself nor to let Simes do it; he had a system of his own. When they were all in the Worry Hole the Captain said, "I want to show you all a wrinkle that takes the strain out of astrogating. With no reflections on our dear brother, Dr. Hendrix, while he was a great astrogator, none better--nevertheless he worked too hard. Now here is a method taught me by my own master. Kelly, if you will have the remote controls led out, please." He had them seat themselves in a half circle, himself, Simes, and Max, around the saddle of the computer, with Kelly in the saddle. Each of them was armed with programming forms and Captain Blaine held the remote-control switches in his lap. "Now the idea is for us each to work a sight in succession, first me, then Mr. Simes, then Mr. Jones. That way we keep the data flowing without strain. All right, lads, start pitching. Transition stations everyone." They made a dry run, then the Captain stood up. "Call me, Mr. Simes, two hours before transition. I believe you and Mr. Jones will find that this method gives you enough rest in the meantime." "Yes, sir. But Captain--may I make a suggestion?" "Eh? Certainly, sir." "This is a fine system, but I suggest that Kelly be put in the astrogating group instead of Jones. Jones is not experienced. We can put Kovak in the saddle and Lundy on the book." Blaine shook his head. "No. Accuracy is everything, sir, so we must have our best operator at the computer. As for Mr. Jones, this is how he must get experience--if he gets rattled, you and I can always fill in for him." He started to leave, then added, "But Kovak can alternate with Kelly until I return. Mustn't have anyone getting tired, that way mistakes are made." "Aye aye, sir." Simes said nothing more to Max. They started working sights, alternately, using written programming on printed forms. The sights were coming in on a twenty-minute schedule, giving each of them forty minutes for a problem if he cared to take it. Max began to think that the Captain's method did have its points. Certainly Dr. Hendrix had worked himself to death-- ships did not wear out but men did. He had plenty of time to work not only his own problems, but those of Simes. The data came out orally and there was nothing to keep Max from programming Simes' sights in his head and checking on what went into the computer. So far as he could see Simes was doing all right--though of course there was no real strain involved, not yet. They ate sandwiches and drank coffee where they sat, leaving their seats only for five minutes or so at a time. Captain Blaine showed up twenty minutes early. He smiled and said cheerily, "Everyone happy and relaxed? Now we really get down to it. I have just time for a cup of coffee." A few minutes later he sat down and took over the control switches from Simes. The sights were coming through on a ten-minute schedule now, still ample time. Max continued to work them all, his own on paper and the others in his head. He was always through in time to catch the data for the next sight, program it mentally and check translations as Lundy thumbed the book. It gave him a running picture of how closely they were in the groove, how much hunting they were having to do in approaching their invisible target. It seemed to him that Simes tended to over-correct and that the Captain was somewhat optimistically under-correcting, but neither was so far out as to endanger the ship. Maybe he was wrong about the Captain--the Old Man seemed to steady down when it mattered. His own corrections, he was glad to see, the Captain applied without question. After more than an hour with transition forty-five. minutes away Captain Blaine looked up and said, "All right, boys, we're getting close. Slam them to us as fast as you can now." Smythe and Kovak, with Noguchi and Bennett running for them, slipped into high gear; data poured out in a steady stream. Max continued to work every sight, programming his own in his head and calling off figures faster than he wrote them down. He noticed that Simes was sweating, sometimes erasing and starting over. But the figures Simes called out agreed with what Max thought they should be, from his own mental programming. Captain Blaine seemed relaxed, though he had not speeded up materially and sometimes was still using the computer when Max was ready to pour his sight into it. At one point Simes spoke too rapidly, slurring his figures, Lundy promptly said, "Repeat, sir!" "Confound it! Clean out your ears!" But Simes repeated. The Captain glanced up, then bent back to his own problem. As soon as the computer was free Captain Blaine called his own figures to Lundy. Max had already set up the Captain's sight in his mind, was subconsciously listening while watching Simes. An alarm bell rang in his mind. "Captain! I don't check you!" Captain Blaine stopped. "Eh?" "That program is wrong, sir." The Captain did not seem angry. He simply handed his programming board to Simes. "Check me, sir." Simes glanced quickly at the figures. "I check you, sir!" Blaine said, "Drop out, Jones. Mr. Simes and I will finish." "But--" "Drop out, Mister!" Max got out of the circle, seething inside. Simes' check of the Captain's set up hadn't meant anything, unless Simes had listened to and remembered (as Max had) the data as it came in. The Captain had transposed an eight and a three in the fifth and sixth decimal places--the set up would look okay unless one knew the correct figures. If Simes had even bothered to check it, he added bitterly. But Max could not keep from noting and processing the data in his mind. Simes' next sight should catch the Captain's error; his correction should repair it. It would be a big correction, Max knew; traveling just under the speed of light the ship clipped a million miles in less than six seconds. Max could see Simes hesitate as the lights from his next sight popped up on the computer and Lundy translated them back. Why, the man looked frightened! The correction called for would push the ship extremely close to critical speed--Simes paused, then ordered less than half the amount that Max believed was needed. Blaine applied it and went on with his next problem. When the answer came out the error, multiplied by time and unthinkable velocity, was more glaring than ever. The Captain threw Simes a glance of astonishment, then promptly made a correction. Max could not tell what it was, since it was done without words by means of the switch in his lap. Simes licked the dryness from his lips. "Captain?" "Time for just one more sight," Blaine answered. "I'll take it myself, Mr. Simes." The data were passed to him, he started to lay his problem out on the form. Max saw him erase, then look up; Max followed his gaze. The pre-set on the chronometer above the computer showed the seconds trickling away. "Stand by!" Blaine announced. Max looked up. The stars were doing the crawling together that marked the last moments before transition. Captain Blaine must have pressed the second switch, the one that would kick them over, while Max was watching, for the stars suddenly blinked out and were replaced instantaneously by another starry firmament, normal in appearance. The Captain lounged back, looked up. "Well," he said happily, "I see we made it again." He got up and headed for the hatch, saying over his shoulder, "Call me when you have laid us in the groove, Mr. Simes." He disappeared down the hatch. Max looked up again, trying to recall from the charts he had studied just what piece of this new sky they were facing. Kelly was looking up, too. "Yes, we came through," Max heard him mutter. "But _where?_" Simes also had been looking at the sky. Now he swung around angrily. "What do you mean?" "What I said," Kelly insisted. "That's not any sky I ever saw before." "Nonsense, man! You just haven't oriented yourself. Everybody knows that a piece of sky can look strange when you first glance at it. Get out the flat charts for this area; we'll find our landmarks quickly enough." "They are out, sir. Noguchi." It took only minutes to convince everyone else in the control room that Kelly was right, only a little longer to convince even Simes. He finally looked up from the charts with a face greenish white. "Not a word to anybody," he said. "That's an order--and I'll bust any man who slips. Kelly, take the watch." "Aye aye, sir." "I'll be in the Captain's cabin." He went below to tell Blaine that the _Asgard_ had come out in unknown space--was lost.