CHAPTER 18: CIVILIZATION

Ellie did not faint nor grow hysterical. After that involuntary scream, her next remark was simply, "Max, I'm sorry. My fault." The words were almost in his ear, so tightly were they tied together by the clinging ropes. He answered, "I'll get us loose!" and continued to strain at their bonds. "Don't struggle," she said quietly, "It just makes them tighter. We'll have to talk our way out of this." What she said was true; the harder he strained the tighter the pythonlike bonds held them. "Don't," Ellie pleaded. "You're making it worse. It's hurting me." Max desisted. The largest centaur ambled up and looked them over. Its broad simple face was still more ludicrous close up and its large brown eyes held a look of gentle astonishment. The colt approached from the other side and sniffed curiously, bleated in a high voice. The adult bugled like an elk; the colt shied sideways, then rejoined the herd on a dead run. "Take it easy," Ellie whispered. "I think they were scared that we would hurt the baby. Maybe they'll just look us over and let us go." "Maybe. But I wish I could get at my knife." "I'm glad you can't. This calls for diplomacy." The rest of the herd came up, milled around and looked them over, while exchanging calls that combined bugling, whinnying, and something between a cough and a snort. Max listened. "That's language," he decided. "Of course. And how I wish I had studied it at Miss Mimsey's." The largest centaur leaned over them, smoothed at their bonds; they became looser but still held them. Max said sharply, "I think they are going to untie us. Get ready to run." "Yes, boss." Another centaur reached into its built-in pouch, took out another of the ropelike things. It dropped to its fore knees, flipped the end so that it curled around Max's left ankle. The end seemed to weld into a loop, hobbling Max as effectively as a bowline knot; Ellie was treated the same way. The biggest centaur then patted their bonds, which fell off and writhed gently on the ground. It picked them up and stuffed them into its pouch. The centaur which had hobbled them wrapped the ends of their tethers around its upright trunk, they merged into a belt. After an exchange of sour bugle calls with the leader, it patted the leashes, . . . which then stretched like taffy, becoming quite twenty feet long and much more slender. Max pressed his knife on Ellie and said, "Try to cut yourself loose. If you can, then run for it. I'll keep them busy." "No, Max." "Yes! Dawggone it, quit being a brat! You've made enough trouble." "Yes, Max." She took the knife and tried to saw through the strange rope near her ankle. The centaurs made no attempt to stop her, but watched with the same air of gentle astonishment. It was as if they had never seen a knife, had no notion of what one was. Presently she gave up. "No good, Max. It's like trying to slice duraplastic." "Why, I keep that knife like a razor. Let me try." He had no better luck. He was forced to stop by the herd moving out--walk or be dragged. He managed to close the knife while hopping on one foot to save his balance. The group proceeded at a slow walk for a few steps, then the leader bugled and the centaurs broke into a trot, exactly like ancient cavalry. Ellie stumbled at once and was dragged. Max sat down, managed to grab his hobble and hang on while shouting, "Hey! Stop!" Their captor stopped and looked around almost apologetically. Max said, "Look, stupid. We can't keep up. We're not horses," while helping Ellie to her feet. "Are you hurt, kid?" "I guess not." She blinked back tears. "If I could lay hands on that hay-burning oaf, he'd be hurt--plenty!" "You skinned your hand." "It won't kill me. Just tell him to slow down, will you?" Seeing them on their feet the monster immediately started to trot again. Down they went again, with Max trying to drag them to a halt. This time the leader trotted back from the main herd and consulted their custodian. Max took part, making up in vehemence what he lacked in semantic efficiency. Perhaps he was effective; their keeper slowed to a fast walk, letting the others go ahead. Another centaur dropped back and became a rear guard. One of the animated balloons, which had continued to hover over the herd, now drifted back and remained over Max and Ellie.

The pace was just bearable, between a fast walk and a dogtrot. The route led across the open, flat floor of the valley and through knee-high grass. The grass saved them somewhat, as the centaur leading them seemed to feel that a fall or two every few hundred yards represented optimum efficiency. He never seemed impatient and would stop and let them get up, but always started off again at a clip brisk for humans. Max and Ellie ceased trying to talk, their throats being burned dry by their panting efforts to keep up. A tiny stream meandered through the bottom of the valley; the centaur jumped easily across it. It was necessary for the humans to wade. Ellie paused in midstream, leaned down and started to drink. Max objected, "Ellie! Don't drink that--you don't know that it's safe." "I hope it poisons me so I can lie down and die. Max, I can't go much farther." "Chin up, kid. We'll get out of this. I've been keeping track of where we've gone." He hesitated, then drank also, being terribly thirsty. The centaur let them, then tugged them on. It was as far again to the rising ground and forest on the other side. They had thought that they were as tired as they could be before they started up hill; they were mistaken. The centaur was agile as a goat and seemed surprised that they found it difficult. Finally Ellie collapsed and would not get up; the centaur came back and stirred her roughly with a three-toed hoof. Max struck him with both fists. The centaur made no move to retaliate but looked at him with that same stupid astonishment. Their rear guard came up and conversed with it, after which they waited for perhaps ten minutes. Max sat down beside Ellie and said anxiously, "Feeling any better?" "Don't talk." Presently the guard edged between them and drove Max back by stepping on him, whereupon the other centaur tugged on Ellie's leash. It contracted and she was forced to scramble to her feet. The centaurs let them rest twice after that. After an endless time, when the local sun was dropping low in the west, they came out on flat table land, still heavily wooded. They continued through trees for a distance which Max's count of paces told him was under a mile but seemed like ten, then stopped. They were in a semi-clearing, a space carpeted with fallen needles. Their guard came up to the other centaur and took from him the end of Max's leash, flipped it around the base of a tree, to which it clung. The other centaur did the same with Ellie's leash to another tree about forty feet away. Having done so, they roughly urged the two together, while stopping to stroke their bonds until they were stretched out very thin. It allowed Max and Ellie enough slack that they might have passed each other. This did not seem to please the centaurs. One of them shifted Max's leash farther back into the surrounding bushes, dragging him with it. This time at the extreme limit allowed by their bonds they were about six feet apart. "What are they doing?" asked Ellie. "Looks like they don't want us to combine forces." Finished, the centaurs trotted away. Ellie looked after them, began to sob, then cried openly, tears running down her dirty face and leaving tracks. "Stow it," Max said harshly. "Sniffling will get us nowhere." "I can't help it," she bawled. "I've been brave all day--at least I've tried to be. I . . ." She collapsed face down and let herself go. By getting down prone and stretching Max could just reach her head. He patted her tangled hair. "Take it easy, kid," he said softly. "Cry it out, if you'll feel better." "Oh, Maxie! Tied up . . . like a dog." "We'll see about that." He sat up and examined his tether. Whatever the ropelike leash was, it was not rope. It had a smooth shiny surface which reminded him more of a snake, though the part that wound around his ankle showed no features; it simply flowed around his ankle and merged back into itself. He lifted the bight and detected a faint throbbing. He stroked it as he had seen the centaurs do and it responded with flowing pulsations, but it neither shrank nor grew longer, nor did it loosen its grip. "Ellie," he announced, "This thing is _alive_." She lifted a woebegone face. "What thing?" "This rope." "Oh, that! Of course." "At least," he went on, "if it isn't, it's not really dead." He tried his knife again, there was no effect. "I'll bet if I had a match I could make it cry 'Uncle.' Got an Everlite, Ellie?" "I don't smoke." "Neither do I. Well, maybe I can make a fire some other way. Rubbing two sticks together, or something." "Do you know how?" "No." He continued stroking and patting the living rope, but, though he always got a response in pulsations, he did not seem to have the right touch; the bond stayed as before. He was continuing this fruitless attempt when he heard his name called. "Max! Ellie!" Ellie sat up with a jerk. "Chipsie! Oh, Max, she followed us. Come here, darling!" The spider puppy was high above them in a tree. She looked carefully around, then scurried down, making the last ten feet a flying leap into Ellie's arms. They cuddled and made soft noises, then Ellie straightened up, her eyes shining. "Max, I feel so much better." "So do I." He added, "Though I don't know why." The spider puppy announced gravely, "Chipsie follow." Max reached across and petted her. "Yes, Chipsie did. Good girl!" Ellie hugged the spider puppy. "I don't feel deserted now, Max. Maybe everything will come out all right." "Look, Ellie, we're not in too bad a spot. Maybe I'll find the combination to tickle these ropes or snakes or whatever so they'll give up. If I do, we'll sneak back tonight." "How would we find our way?" "Don't worry. I watched every foot of the way, every change of direction, every landmark." "Even in the dark?" "Easier in the dark. I know these stars--I sure ought to. But suppose we don't get loose; we still aren't licked." "Huh? I don't relish spending my life tied to a tree." "You won't. Look--I think these things are just curious about us. They won't eat us, that's sure--they probably live on grass. Maybe they'll get bored and turn us loose. But if they don't, it'll be rough on them." "Huh? Why?" "Because of Mr. Walther and George Daigler--and Sam, Sam Anderson; that's why. They're probably beating the bushes for us right now. We are less than ten miles from the ship--five by a straight line. They'll find us. Then if these silly-looking centaurs want to get tough, they'll learn about modern weapons. They and their fool throwing ropes!" "It might take a long time to find us. Nobody knows where we went." "Yes," he admitted. "If I had a pocket radio. Or some way to signal. Or even a way to build a fire. But I don't." "I never thought. It just seemed like going for a stroll in the park." Max thought darkly that he had tried to warn her. Why, even the hills around home weren't safe if a body didn't keep his eyes peeled . . . you could run into a mean old bobcat, or even a bear. Person like Ellie never 'ud had enough hard knocks to knock sense into her, that was her trouble. Presently he admitted that he himself hadn't looked for grief from anything as apparently chuckled-headed and harmless as these centaur things. Anyhow, as Sam would say, no use cryin' over spilt milk when the horse was already stolen. "Ellie." "Huh?" "Do you suppose Chipsie could find her way back?" "Why, I don't know." "If she could, we could send a message." Chipsie looked up. "Back?" she inquired. "Please back. Go home." Ellie frowned. "I'm afraid Chipsie doesn't talk that well. She'd probably just hiccup and get incoherent." "I don't mean that. I know Chipsie is no mental giant. I . . ." "Chipsie is smart!" "Sure. But I want to send a written message and a map." He fumbled in a pocket, pulled out a stylus. "Do you have any paper?" "I'll see." She found a folded paper in a dungaree pocket. "Oh, dear! I was supposed to take this to Mr. Giordano. Mr. Hornsby will be so vexed with me." "What is it?" "A requisition for number-ten wire." "It doesn't matter now." He took the paper, scratched out the memorandum, turned it over and began to draw, stopping to consult the pictures filed in his mind for distances, which way the local sun lay, contours, and other details. "Max?" "Quiet, can't you?" He continued to sketch, then added: "URGENT--to First Officer Walther: Eldreth Coburn and self captured by centaurs. Be careful and watch out for their throwing ropes. Respectfully, M. Jones." He handed it to Ellie. "That ought to do it. Is there any way to fasten it to her? I sure don't want her to drop it." "Mmm . . . let me see. Turn your back, Max." "Why?" "Don't be difficult. Turn your back." He did so, shortly she said, "All right now." He faced her and she handed him a ribbon. "How's this?" "Swell!" They managed to tie the ribbon, with the note folded and firmly attached, around Mr. Chips' waist, anchoring it to a middle limb . . . not too easy as the spider puppy seemed to think it was a game and was ticklish as well. "There! Stop squirming, Chipsie, and listen. Ellie wants you to go home." "Home?" "Yes, home. Go back to the ship." "Ellie go home?" "Ellie can't go home." "No." "Honey, you've _got_ to." "No." "Look, Chipsie. You find Maggie and tell her Ellie said to give you some candy. You give Maggie this." She tugged at the tied note. "Candy?" "Go home. Find Maggie. Maggie will give you candy." "Ellie go home." "Please, Chipsie." "Ellie," Max said urgently, "something is coming." Eldreth looked up, saw a centaur coming through the trees. She pointed. "Look, Chipsie! They're coming! They'll catch Chipsie! Go home! Run!" The spider puppy squealed in terror and scurried for the trees. Once on a branch she looked back and whimpered. "Go home!" screamed Ellie. "Find Maggie!" Mr. Chips shot a glance at the centaur, then disappeared. They had no time to worry further, the centaur was almost up to them. He glanced at them and went on by; it was what followed the centaur that grabbed their attention. Ellie suppressed a shriek. "Max! They've caught everybody." "No," he corrected grimly. "Look again." The gathering gloom had caused him to make the same mistake; it seemed that the entire ship's company trotted after the centaur in single file, ankle leashed to ankle by living ropes. But only the first glance gave such an impression. These creatures were more than humanoid--but such degraded creatures had never sailed between the stars. They shuffled quickly along like well-trained animals. One or two looked at Ellie and Max in passing, but their stares were bovine, incurious. Small children not on leash trotted with their mothers, and once Max was startled to see a wrinkled little head peeping out of a pouch--these man-creatures were marsupials, too. Max controlled a desire to retch and as they passed out of sight he turned to Ellie. "Gosh!" "Max," Eldreth said hoarsely, "do you suppose we've died and gone to our punishment?" "Huh? Don't be silly. Things are bad enough." "I mean it. That was something right out of Dante's Inferno." Max was swallowing uneasily and not feeling good-tempered. "Look, you can pretend you're dead if you want to. Me, I'm alive and I mean to stay so. Those things weren't men. Don't let it throw you." "But they _were_ men. Men and women and children." "No, they weren't. Being shaped like us doesn't make them men. Being a man is something else entirely." He scowled. "Maybe the centaurs are 'men.'" "Oh, no--" "Don't be too sure. They seem to run things in this country." The discussion was cut short by another arrival. It was almost dark and they did not see the centaur until he entered their clearing. He was followed by three of the--Max decided to call them 'men' though he resented the necessity--followed by three men. They were not on leashes. All three were bearing burdens. The centaur spoke to them; they distributed what they carried. One of them set down a large clay bowl filled with water in the space separating Max and Ellie. It was the first artifact that any human had seen on Charity and did not indicate a high level of mechanical culture, being crudely modeled and clearly not thrown on a potter's wheel; it held water, no more could be said for it. A second porter dumped a double armful of small fruits beside the bowl. Two of them splashed into the bowl, he did not bother to fish them out. Max had to look twice to see what the third slave was carrying. It looked as if he had three large ovoid balls slung by ropes in each of his hands; second inspection showed them to be animals about the size of opossums which he carried by their tails. He went around the clearing, stopping every few feet and lifting one of his burdens to a lower branch. When he had finished they were surrounded by six small creatures, each hanging by its tail. The centaur followed the slave, Max saw him stroke each animal and press a spot on its neck. In each case the entire body of the little animal lit up, began to shine like a firefly with soft silvery light. The clearing was softly illuminated thereby--well enough, Max thought, to read large print. One of the hobgoblins balloons came sailing silently between trees and anchored to a point thirty feet above them; it seemed to settle down for the night. The centaur came over to Max and prodded him with a hoof, snorting inquiringly. Max listened carefully, then repeated the sound. The centaur answered and again Max mimicked. This useless exchange continued for a few phrases, then the centaur gave up and left, his train trotting after him. Ellie shivered. "Phew!" she exclaimed, "I'm glad they're gone. I can stand the centaurs, a little, but those men . . . ugh!" He shared her disgust; they looked less human close up, having hair lines that started where their eyebrows should have been. They were so flat-headed that their ears stuck up above their skulls. But it was not this that had impressed Max. When the centaur had spoken to him Max had gotten his first good look into a centaur's mouth. Those teeth were never meant for munching grain, they were more like the teeth of a tiger--or a shark. He decided not to mention this. "Say, wasn't that the same one that was leading the herd that caught us?" "How would I know? They all look alike." "But they don't, any more than two horses look alike." "Horses all look alike." "But . . ." He stopped, baffled by a city viewpoint at which communication failed. "I think it was the same one." "I can't see that it matters." "It might. I'm trying to learn their language." "I heard you swallowing your tonsils. How did you do that?" "Oh, you just remember what a sound sounds like, then do it." He threw his head back and made a very plaintive sound. "What was _that?_" "A shote stuck in a fence. Little shote by the name of Abner I had once." "It sounds tragic." "It was, until I helped him loose. Ellie, I think they've bedded us down for the night." He gestured at the bowl and the fruit beside it. "Like feeding the hogs." "Don't put it that way. Room service. Room service and maid service and lights. Food and drink." She picked up one of the fruits. It was about the size and shape of a cucumber. "Do you suppose this is fit to eat?" "I don't think you ought to try it. Ellie, it would be smart not to eat or drink anything until we are rescued." "Well, maybe we could go hungry but we certainly can't go without water. You die of thirst in a day or two." "But we may be rescued before morning." "Maybe." She peeled the fruit. "It smells good. Something like a banana." He peeled one and sniffed it. "More like a pawpaw." "Well?" "Mmm-- Look here, I'll eat one. If it hasn't made me sick in a half hour, then you can try one." "Yes, sir, boss man." She bit into the one she held. "Mind the seeds." "Ellie, you're a juvenile delinquent." She wrinkled her nose and smiled. "You say the sweetest things! I try to be." Max bit into his. Not bad--not as much flavor as a pawpaw, but not bad. Some minutes later he was saying, "Maybe we should leave some for breakfast?" "All right. I'm full anyway." Ellie leaned over and drank. Without words they had each concluded that the cloying meal required them to risk the water. "There, I feel better. At least we'll die comfortably. Max? Do you think we dare sleep? I'm dead." "I think they are through with us for the night. You sleep, I'll sit up." "No, that's not fair. Honest, what good would it do to keep watch? We can't get away." "Well . . . here, take my knife. You can sleep with it in your hand." "All right." She reached across the bowl and accepted it. "Good night, Max. I'm going to count sheep." "Good night." He stretched out, shifted and got a tree cone out of his ribs, then tried to relax. Fatigue and a full stomach helped, the knowledge of their plight hindered--and that hobgoblin hanging up there. Maybe _it_ was keeping watch--but not for their benefit. "Max? Are you asleep?" "No, Ellie." "Hold my hand? I'm _scared_." "I can't reach it." "Yes, you can. Swing around the other way." He did so, and found that he could reach over his head past the water bowl and clasp her hand. "Thanks, Max. Good night some more." He lay on his back and stared up through the trees. Despite the half light given by the luminiferous animals he could see stars and the numerous meteor trails crisscrossing the sky. To avoid thinking he started counting them. Presently they started exploding in his head and he was asleep.

The light of the local sun through the trees awakened him. He raised his head. "I wondered how long you would sleep," Eldreth announced. "Look who's here." He sat up, wincing with every move, and turned around. Mr. Chips was sitting on Ellie's middle and peeling one of the papaya-like fruits. "Lo, Maxie." "Hello, Chipsie." He saw that the note was still tied to her. "Bad girl!" Mr. Chips turned to Ellie for comfort. Tears started to leak out. "No, no," corrected Ellie. "Good girl. She's promised to go find Maggie as soon as she finishes breakfast. Haven't you, dear?" "Go find Maggie," the spider puppy agreed. "Don't blame her, Max. Spider puppies aren't nocturnal back home. She just waited until we were quiet, then came back. She couldn't help it. I found her sleeping in my arm." The spider puppy finished eating, then drank daintily from the bowl. Max decided that it didn't matter, considering who had probably used it before they had. This thought he suppressed quickly. "Find Maggie," Mr. Chips announced. "Yes, dear. Go straight back to the ship as fast as you can and find Maggie. Hurry." "Find Maggie. Hurry fast. 'Bye, Maxie." The spider puppy took to the trees and scampered away in the right direction. "Do you think she'll get there?" asked Max. "I think so. After all, her ancestors found their way through forests and such for a lot of generations. She knows it's important; we had a long talk." "Do you really think she understands that much?" "She understands about pleasing me and that's enough. Max, do you suppose they can possibly reach us today? I don't want to spend another night here." "Neither do I. If Chipsie can move faster than we can . . ." "Oh, she can." "Then maybe--if they start quickly." "I hope so. Ready for breakfast?" "Did Chipsie leave anything?" "Three apiece. I've had mine. Here." "Sure you're lying? There were only five when we went to sleep." She looked sheepish and allowed him to split the odd one. While they were eating he noticed a change. "Hey, what became of the over-sized lightning bugs?" "Oh. One of those awful creatures came at dawn and carried them away. I was set to scream but he didn't come close to me, so I let you sleep." "Thanks. I see our chaperone is with us." The hobgoblin still hung in the tree tops. "Yes, and there have been peekers around all morning, too." "Did you get a look at one?" "Of course not." She stood up, stretched and winced. "Now to see what beautiful surprises this lovely day brings forth." She made a sour face. "The program I would pick is to sit right here and never lay eyes on anything until George Daigler shows up with about a dozen armed men. I'd kiss him. I'd kiss all of them." "So would I." Until well past noon Eldreth's chosen schedule prevailed, nothing happened. They heard from time to time the bugling and snorting of centaurs but saw none. They talked in desultory fashion, having already disposed of both hopes and fears, and were dozing in the sunshine, when they suddenly came alert to the fact that a centaur was entering the clearing. Max felt sure that it was the leader of the herd, or at least that it was the one who had fed and watered them. The creature wasted no time, making it clear with kicks and prods that they were to allow themselves to be leashed for travel. Never once were they free of the living ropes. Max thought of attacking the centaur, perhaps leaping on his back and cutting his throat. But it seemed most unlikely that he could do it quietly enough; one snort might bring the herd down on them. Besides which he knew no way to get free of their bonds even if he killed the centaur. Better wait--especially with a messenger gone for help. They were led, falling and being dragged occasionally, along the route taken by the party of slaves. It became apparent that they were entering a large centaur settlement. The path opened out into a winding, well-tended road with centaurs going both directions and branching off onto side roads. There were no buildings, none of the outward marks of a civilized race--but there was an air of organization, of custom, of stability. Little centaurs scampered about, got in the way, and were ordered aside. There was activity of various sorts on both sides of the road and grotesque human slaves were almost as numerous as centaurs, carrying burdens, working in unexplained fashions--some with living-rope bonds, some allowed to run free. They could not see much because of the uncomfortable pace they were forced to maintain. Once Max noted an activity on his side of the road that he wished to see better. He did not mention it to Ellie, not only because talking was difficult but because he did not wish to worry her--but it had looked like an outdoor butcher shop to him. The hanging carcasses were not centaurs. They stopped at last in a very large clearing, well filled with centaurs. Their master patted the lines that bound them and thereby caused them to shorten until they were fetched close to his sides. He then took his place in a centaur queue. A large, grizzled, and presumably elderly centaur was holding court on one side of the "square." He stood with quiet dignity as single centaurs or groups came in succession before him. Max watched with interest so great that he almost lost his fear. Each case would be the cause of much discussion, then the centaur chieftain would make a single remark and the case would be over. The contestants would leave quietly. The conclusion was inescapable that law or custom was being administered, with the large centaur as arbiter. There was none of the travesties of men in the clearing but there were underfoot odd animals that looked like flattened-out hogs. Their legs were so short that they seemed more like tractor treads. They were mostly mouth and teeth and snuffling snouts, and whatever they came to, if it was not a centaur's hoof, they devoured. Max understood from watching them how the area, although thickly inhabited, was kept so clean; these scavengers were animated street cleaners. Their master gradually worked up toward the head of the line. The last case before theirs concerned the only centaur they had seen which did not seem in vibrant health. He was old and skinny, his coat was dull and his bones stuck pitifully through his hide. One eye was blind, a blank white; the other was inflamed and weeping a thick ichor. The judge, mayor, or top herd leader discussed his case with two younger healthy centaurs who seemed to be attending him almost as nurses. Then the boss centaur moved from his position of honor and walked around the sick one, inspecting him from all sides. Then he spoke to him. The old sick one responded feebly, a single snorted word. The chief centaur spoke again, got what seemed to Max the same answer. The chief backed into his former position, set up a curious whinnying cry. From all sides the squatty scavengers converged on the spot. They formed a ring around the sick one and his attendants, dozens of them, snuffling and grunting. The chief bugled once; one attendant reached into its pouch and hauled forth a creature curled into a knot, the centaur stroked it and it unwound. To Max it looked unpleasantly like an eel. The attendant extended it toward the sick centaur. It made no move to stop him, but waited, watching with his one good eye. The head of the slender thing was suddenly touched to the neck of the sick centaur; he jerked in the characteristic convulsion of electric shock and collapsed. The chief centaur snorted once--and the scavengers waddled forward with surprising speed, swarming over the body and concealing it. When they backed away, still snuffling, there were not even bones. Max called out softly, "Steady, Ellie! Get a grip on yourself, kid." She answered faintly, "I'm all right."